---
aliases:
  - Personal Income Spending Flowchart, Canada
date: 2024-10-06
date modified: 2024-10-07
title: Personal Income Spending Flowchart, Canada
---

# Personal Income Spending Flowchart, Canada

There are 7 phases to achieve a good financial status in Canada, according to .[^1] Note that the guide is just a suggestion, and you can make adjustment to meet your actual needs.

## Step 0: Budget & Reduce Expenses

Be realistic.

Budget is fundamental to a good financial standing. You know how your money comes, and where they are going. When building budget, think about it in this order.

1. Rent / Mortgage (include home insurance)
1. Food / Groceries
1. Essential items (electricity, water, heat)
1. Income earning expenses (transportation, internet, phone, ...)
1. Taxes
1. Payments on other debts and loans (student loans, credit cards)
    - Note that the image mentions "Minimum Payment" which I don't understand why. Credit card interest is high, we should not owe any credit card debt.

## Step 1: Build an Emergency Fund

If in a worse situation, build a small emergency fund first (1 month's expense) in a savings or chequing account. When all high interest debts are repaid, increase to 3 months' worth.

Then pay non-essential bills in full (also only applicable for worse case, otherwise, always include it in budget and pay it in full)

## Step 2: Employer-sponsored Matching Funds

If there is any, contribute the amount that make the employer match in full, and not more than the required contribution.

## Step 3: Pay High / Moderate Interest Debts

- High interest rate debt := > 10%
- Moderate interest rate debt := > 4% excluding mortgage

#TODO: The image mentions "Avalanche" and "Snowball" method. Not sure what that means.

Pay off the debt that matches your financial / psychological situation.

## Step 4: Save for Retirement

Contribute 15% of pre-tax income into [[20240622225653|TFSA]] / [[20240620153810|RRSP]]. In my opinion, if annual income > $100k (around the second tax bracket in Ontario as of 2024), fill in RRSP first.

If you need large purchases for investing in yourself / tools for work (college / certificates / car), save them before saving for retirement.

## Step 5: Save More for Retirement

Increase contributions to registered savings accounts. If they are maxed out, start investing in normal investment accounts. Capital gains are taxed at 50% to encourage investment in the country in general.

## Step 6: Save for Goals

If you have children, contribute to RESP.

If you want to retire early, max out TFSA, RRSP, employer sponsored accounts, then use taxable accounts.

For goals that is to be consumed sooner than 3-5 years, use savings. For longer period, using conservative investment (stocks mixed with bonds)

## References

[^1]: https://na.cx/i/917ZhjO.png
