---
aliases:
  - React Design Patterns
date: 2024-07-28
date modified: 2024-07-28
title: React Design Patterns
---

# React Design Patterns

## Single Responsibility Principle

Each component should be responsible for only one thing, and delegate everything else to other components. [^1]

Example: `Index` component of a blog should be responsible for 1) managing the `posts` state, 2) passing the `posts` state to `PostFeed` component, 3) container styles

(I don't agree with the example. I think `posts` state should be managed in `PostFeed` unless there is something else to do with `posts` in the home page. The `Index` component should only contain the containers with styles and it's own children) (The YouTuber did reply to a similar question. He thinks that the principle doesn't mean a component should do one single thing, but about the responsibility which includes holding data / state as the responsibility)

## Page, Feature, UI

**Page Components** - Handle data

**Feature Components** - Handle the business logic of the component only. Made up of smaller UI components

**UI Components** - Render HTML components. No business logic

## Compound Components

Component components are components that are designed to work together. The concept is better to be explained in code

```typescript
const Select = ({children}: SelectProps) => {
  ...
  return (
    <SelectContext.Provider value={...}>
      <select ...>{children}</select>
    </SelectedContext.Provider>
  )
}

const Option = ({children}: OptionProps) => {
  const context = useSelectContext()
  ...
  return (
	<option ...>{children}</option>
  )
}

Select.Option = Option

const useSelectContext() = () => {
  const context = useContext(SelectContext)

  if (!context) {
	throw new Error("...")
  }
  
  return context
}

export default Select
```

In the parent component, we have a context provider. Available children components are added to parent component as additional properties. Child components should call `use...Context()` hook so it won't work outside of the parent component.

## Hook Files

Extract all hooks into a `.hooks.ts` file. This makes the component file simpler.

## References

[^1]: [Design patterns in React - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MdvzlDIdQ0o)
