---
aliases:
  - Phone Addiction
date: 2024-10-02
date modified: 2024-10-02
title: Phone Addiction
---

# Phone Addiction

## What is an Addiction?

Addiction is **the loss of control, the establishment of a dependent relationship, tolerance, the need for progressively more time and dedication, and severe interference with daily life (Echeburua et al., 2009).**

High usage may not necessarily mean addiction. It is the **loss of control** and **psychological dependency** that matter.

## What Makes People Addicted to Phone or the Internet?

Digital rewards and difficulties in life.

People can use the phone to

- Escape from reality
- Enjoy social rewards (like, social karma, social validation)
- Play rewarding games

## What Are the Indicators of Problematic Phone Use?

("Problematic phone use" can use interchangeably with "Phone addiction")

- Spend continuous hours on phone (games, social media, apps, text)
- Pick up the phone not for notification but for updates on social media feeds
- Online and offline behaviour gets integrated
- Get restless when phone is dead / out of battery / out of coverage / low on data
- Use phone as the security blanket in social gathering
- Relationship are strained, and cannot focus and commit to important things in your life
- Feel bad about ourselves but feel good online.

Examples of such indicators are

- Infinite scrolling on Instagram
- Playing games for hours while social activities contain little communication
- Display of hurt, loneliness, attention-seeking behaviour, hate, jealousy, disapproval on social media
- Social needs are not met. Online alternatives are used to compensate that
- Inability to feel pleasure and excitement in the offline world. Excessive emotions are tied to online rewards
- FOMO and nomophobia (no-mobile phobia) cause mental and physical discomfort
- Experience Phantom notifications

## Related Researches

**Variable-ratio-variable-reward reinforcement**

We maximize a behaviour when we get random rewards at random interval. Increasing the number of rewards increases the behaviour. Phone is a source of unexpected and expected rewards.

## Suggestions to Cope with Phone Addiction

**Make phone less addictive**

- Minimalistic phone
- Delete least-used apps
- Use apps at a fixed time
- Stop notification
- Use black and white themes
- Use phone's well-being solution
- Charge phone away from you
- Stop personalized recommendations

**Schedule a time for un-monitored phone use**

**Interrupt habitual routine**

**Introspect about expectations**

**Replace first phone routine**

**Delete apps, switch off phone, limit notifications**

**Categorize phone activities and assign a time per activity**

**Figure out and work on social needs**

**Manage your need for distractions and stimulation**

**Practice phone-down routines**

## References

[How to overcome Phone Addiction [Solutions + Research]](https://cognitiontoday.com/phone-addiction-coping-solutions-research-statistics/)
